
==== <C:\PID\emicetic.01>
to be the appropriate way to approach them.  I am herein using
the terms to mean the same as "the ways that 'a' and 'the' modify
their referents."  To speak of "a" something is for my purposes
to approach it emically.  To speak of "the" something is to
approach it etically.  Both have advantages and disadvantages in

==== <C:\PID\emicetic.01>
        A careful reader (or _the_ careful reader!) might notice
that this in effect treats determiners "a" and "the" as actions,
as verbs, as "ways of approaching."  While at first this may seem
odd, it is precisely what I perceive them to do--they modify
something, bounding it in a particular fashion.  They in effect
transform it from some ineffable, unanalyzable substance into a
form, either created or discerned.
        The questions of whether emic and/or etic exist "out there"
can be broached only after scholars agree upon what they mean. 
On close examination, they appear to be ways of creating and
discovering.  As such emic and etic are actions or processes,
verb-like transformations of stuff into something usable or
analyzable.  That humans do this, especially with language,
appears to be a universal.  How they do it seems to be infinitely
variable.  Somehow these two features--species-wide universality
and infinite variability--need to be considered in the same
world.  Bounding, and diffusion of boundaries, is how we make the
world analyzable.

==== <C:\PID\pike01>
     <emicetic.01>
Pike on the problems of interpreting synchronically-described
clusters:  

          In the process of change from one phonemic system     
to a differnt phonemic system of the same language,
     there may be a time during which parts of the two
     systems exist simultaneously and in conflict within the     
speech of of singlew individuals. . . . It is
     impossible to give a purely synchronic description of a     
complex mixed system, at one point in time, which shows      the
pertinent facts of that system; directionm of 
     change is a pertinent characteristic of the system and     
must also be known if one wishes to have a complete
     descriptipon of the language as it is structurallly
     constituted

                         --from Fries and Pike (1949),
"Coexistent Phonemic Systems" quoted from 161 of Weinrich, Labov,
and Herzog in Lehmann, _Directions..._ (full cite on 190)

This quote can be generalized through paraphrase by using
"culture" for "language" and Pike's back formation of "emic" from
"phonemic": 
     In the process of change from one emic system to a
     different emic system of the same culture, there may be     
a time during which parts of the two systems exist
     simultaneously and in conflict within single
     individuals. . . . It is impossible to give a purely
     synchronic description of a complex mixed system, at
     one point in time, which shows the pertinent facts of
     that system; directionm of  change is a pertinent
     characteristic of the system and must also be known if     
one wishes to have a complete description of the
     culture as it is structurallly constituted

==== <P-C\P-CJOURD.OTL>
     linear stage models of transformation of pidgins
     into creoles  are "rigid and dogmatic" in the face
     of creoles without prior pidgins, for
     non-nativized expanded pidgins and so forth.  This
     is poor interpretation of structures in linguistic
     theory--they are not meant to be series, although
     many take them to be.  transformations are not
     through time and space.  It is also a restatement
     of the obvious in regard to the matter of prior
     pidgins.  This issue has been on the table since
     at least Hall's book, and is a favorite sawhorse
     of sociolinguists, who are pretty much the only
     ones who drag the thing out any more, only to
     attributre it to their generative foes of the
     moment (Hymes, rather than tewaching historical
     method to Jouirdan, more likely taught her this.
     He was bashing at transformational models of
     pidgins and creoles and at chomsky in general with
     this positon in the 1960s. <sochym00>

==== <LSA\LSA-PPR.FIN>
INDIVIDUALS AND AGGREGATES THROUGH TIME 
        The strands of temporal narrative are obscured when
individuals performing particular actions at specific times are
lumped into an aggregate or when diachronic processes are
analyzed as a synchronous mass.  The intentional stance of
historical actors is lost.  At any particular moment, individuals
may be assumed to be seeking to "make sense" of their world in
their thoughts and actions.  Communities and statistical
aggregates, though they may generate discernable patterns and
correlations, cannot be granted such purposiveness and agency. 
Often, the conclusions that can be rationally drawn from
aggregate data correlations cannot be sustained once the
constraints of time--unidirectionality and the unknowable nature
of future events--are imposed.  
        The most prevalent (and contentious) areas of tacit
ahistoricism in pidgin and creole studies concern the ways that
individuals and communities act through time, especially in
relation to the concept of generations.  When speech communities
are treated as individuals the boundaries between immigrant
(pidgin or second language speaking) and native (creole or first
language speaking) become amorphous.  While a useful reduction,
the notion of generations cannot be applied literally to speech
communities unless all the members thereof can be unambiguously
designated as such and give birth and die in unison. 
        Nonetheless, individuals can be reasonably located, with a
minimum of ambiguity, as being either immigrant or native to a
particular speech community even as the membership and speechways
of the composite change through time.  Most of the seeming
contradictions between creolists who recognize discrete
generations and those who claim that pidgins and creoles merge
imperceptibly into each other, if they can be differentiated at
all, are traceable to this set of reductions.  
